# EukRep_Pipeline

An example workflow for binning eukaryotic genomes from a metagenome incorporating EukRep. 
Included is an example bash script, euk_pipeline.sh, that incorporates all of the steps below.

## Requirements:
* Pre-assembled shotgun metagenomic sample with per-scaffold coverage information
* EukRep
* CONCOCT or metabat
* genemark-ES
* MAKER2
* BUSCO

## Optional (but recommended):
* pyenv

-----

### Classify with EukRep
* Run EukRep on the pre-assembled shotgun metagenomic sample
```
EukRep -i metagenome.fa -o euk_contigs.fa 
```

### Automated binning
* This step is important for cases where there are multiple eukaryotic genomes in your sample. Also very helpful for removing any remaining prokaryotic scaffolds from eukaryotic bins
* Requires per-scaffold coverage information

Performed with CONCOCT:
```
concoct --coverage_file euk_contig_cov.txt --composition_file euk_contigs.fa
mkdir clusters
python /path/to/CONCOCT/scripts/extract_fasta_bins.py --output_path ./clusters/ euk_contigs.fa clustering_gt1000.csv
```
Performed with metabat:
```
metabat -a euk_contig_cov.txt -i euk_contigs.fa -o bin -t 6
```

### Filtering by bin size
* In order to miss as few Eukaroytic bins and scaffolds as possible, EukRep has a known false positive rate around 2%. 
* We find it useful to filter out any bins smaller than either 3 Mbp at this stage. This filtering removes the majority of  false positives 

### Train GeneMark-ES
```
perl gmes_petap.pl --ES -min_contig 10000 --sequence bin_1.fa
```
* the -min_contig option specifies the minimum length of a contig used to train the gene prediction model for your bin. You do not need every contig of your bin used, however training may fail if too little of your contigs are above the threshold. Many bins from metagenomes can be quite fragmented so this option may need to be adjusted.

### Run MAKER2 gene prediction
```
maker -g bin_1.fa -c 6
cd *.maker.output
fasta_merge -d *_master_datastore_index.log -o bin_1
```
* MAKER is used to generate a set of eukaryotic gene predictions for your bin. 
* MAKER uses control files. Included in this directory are example control files modified to use only ab inito gene models generated by GeneMark-ES
* MAKER is capable of incorporating homologous proteins from reference genomes of related organisms, transcriptomic evidence, and ab initio gene prediction (such as those predicted by GeneMark-ES), all of which are important for obtaining reliably high quality gene predictions for eukaryotic genomes.
* For many metagenomic samples, performing ab initio gene predictions is the only available option.  


### Run BUSCO 
```
python3 BUSCO.py -i *.maker.proteins.fasta -l eukaryota_odb9 -o bin_1 -m prot
```
* BUSCO will look for single copy orthologous genes (SCGs) within your bin, giving an estimate of completeness (and a rough estimation of contamination with duplicate single copy genes). 
* -l specifies the lineage set of SCGs to use. We generally use eukaryota_odb9 as it is the most general, however if and when you get a better idea of what type fo organisms your bin belongs to, it is possible to use a more specific lineage set.
